In this video, we're going
to look at how we can create
our own custom charts using
a few sophisticated
formatting techniques.
Why would we need a custom
chart given how many
fantastic chart options Excel
now makes available to us.
It's possible that you won't
have the latest version,
so you might not have
all those chart types.
It's also possible that
your data might need
something a bit different,
or it might be just
that you want to grab
your audience's attention by
presenting something that
looks a bit different.
For whatever reason you may find
you need to create your
own custom charts,
and what we're going
to do is look at
some techniques that
will help you do that.
In this example, Rowan
wants to create a
visualization that will
demonstrate how the population in
the UK has aged over
the last 24 years.
What he wants is a
funnel style chart,
but he wants to show
the female data on the
left and the male data on
the right and
Excel's funnel chart
doesn't give us that option.
We're going to create
a custom chart using
a standard bar chart
and it's going to look
something like this.
Now, I'm going to
get rid of that.
Rowan has already done
some some preparation.
Just using a SUMIFS function,
he's summarized the percentage
male and female data
for each age group for
the year selected in I3.
We can actually come and change
the year and you'll
see the data updates.
Now, there's one more
thing we need to
do before we create the chart.
We need to make all the
female values negative
because we actually want them to
show the left of the y-axis.
Now the correct thing to do
would be to come on here,
double-click and just pop
a minus in there at the
front of the formula.
But I'd actually like to show you
quite a neat little option if you
actually have to work off
the original dataset.
We need to convert all
these values to negative.
In other words, we need to
multiply them by minus one.
I'm going to pop minus one into
G2 and then I'm going
to press Control Enter,
which is like pressing Enter,
but I stay in the cell.
Then going to copy,
Control C and I'm
going to select the data
I want to make negative,
Control Shift down arrow.
I'm now going to come to
my home tab and I'm
going to find the paste.
I'm going to click the drop-down,
and I'm going to
choose Paste Special.
One of the special
options is you can apply
an operation and we
want to multiply.
I then click Okay and all
my values are now negative,
really neat little option.
Let's go and create our chart.
I'm going to select the
data from L3 down to N23,
then I'm going to come to Insert,
I'm going to come
to my chart group,
find my column chart and I'm just
going for a 2D Bar chart.
Let's now move that into
place so it's covering
the data and just make
it a little bit bigger.
A few problems.
First of all, the bars
are not lining up,
which is normal behavior,
but not what we want.
With our chart selected
keyboard shortcut
Control One to open
a bar formatting panel and
click onto one of the series,
doesn't matter which one.
Then we're going to come
to our Series Options,
and what we want to
do here is change
our series overlap
to be 100 percent.
You can see now they're
lining up beautifully.
The gap width are quite wide,
which is making my bars narrow,
if I change that to be
50 percent you'll see my
bars get a little fatter.
Much better, but we still have
a fairly large problem
with our vertical axis.
Because these values
are actually negative,
the axis labels are lining
up next to the axis,
which is again normal
but not what we want.
We're going to click
onto our vertical axis,
and then in our
panel on the right,
we're going to choose
Axis Options and this
is quite a well hidden
little feature.
But if you come down to
Labels and Label Position,
you can choose to position
them low and that moves
them to the left
of the data point
rather than right
next to the axis.
That's looking much
better. We also
need to make a few tweaks
to our horizontal axis,
I'm going to click
on to that next.
We actually need to
lock the minimum and
maximum because otherwise
as the values change,
the axis could change and
will look a little strange.
We are going to come into
our minimum and
make that minus 10,
and then I'm going to press
Tab twice and make that 10.
Same values, but now
they're going to
stay fixed rather than adjusting.
Then one more thing,
although these are
negative values,
we don't want them to
show as negatives.
Remember our custom
number formatting,
we looked at week 1?
That's about to come
in handy again,
I'm going to scroll down to
number and at the moment it's
applying a general format,
but we need our own format
so let's says format code.
Just remove the general and we
want it to be zero if
it's positive semicolon,
zero if it's negative semicolon,
and zero if it's zero.
Now if you click Add x is fixed.
Why? That's the main
formats we want to change.
I'm just going to
close that panel now.
But there are couple
of other tweaks.
We don't want our grid lines, I'm
going to switch those off.
But more importantly, we
need a good chart title.
Only our chart title is actually
going to change
depending on our year
because we need to see this as
the UK population data for
whichever year we've selected.
I'm going to move this down
a little and we're going to
create a really
simple formula in P3.
I'm going to type equals,
I'm going to open
my double-quotes,
because I'm putting in text,
and I'm going to put UK
population and space.
Then I'm going to close
my quotes for my text.
Now, I need to join
it to the year.
The official term is concatenate,
and I can do that
using an ampersand.
I'm going to type ampersand,
click on 1997 and
then press Enter.
Now, all I need to do is click
back onto my chart title,
make sure you've
clicked on the border,
not inside the box.
Come into my Formula Bar,
type equals and
just like a shape,
we can link it up to
the value in a cell and
when I press Enter,
there's my population.
I'm going to move the
chart back into place
now and if we come
and change our years,
if I click the drop-down
and set that back to 1996,
the chart title updates.
Your chart title can also be
linked to a cell and you can
make it a bit more dynamic.
If we now go through the chart,
you see at the moment, 1996,
our biggest population
was in the early '30s.
If I click the drop-down
and change it to 2003,
you'll see it's gone
up to the late '30s.
If I now jump forward
in time to 2019,
our biggest population band
is actually in the early '50s.
We can see that the population
has aged over the last 24 years,
but having to come
and click these
drop-downs is not great.
The last step we'd like to
do is animate the chart.
You may recall in week 1,
we looked at a way of
recording a macro to do
that animation and you could
absolutely do that here.
All you need to do is come in and
record yourself clicking
through each year.
Not the most efficient though
I'm just moving these over here.
Actually, I've given
you another macros,
it's already written for
you just so you can see
an alternative. Let's
have a quick look at it.
I'm going to press Alt F11
and this has brought
me into my VBA Editor
and here's our macro,
it's called ChartAnimate.
Instead of going through and
changing the year
one step at a time,
we've used a for-loop.
What the for-loop
will do is it will,
it's like a little
space in memory,
it's called a variable
and it contain a value.
It'll we'll start with
the value 1996 and
then each time we loop through
it will add one to it.
Then this line of code will
take whatever value is
sitting in that count
and pop it into I3.
It's literally going to loop
through changing the value
until it hits 2019 and then
it's going to drop out.
There's an alternative,
you can copy paste code.
You now know how or if you
want to record yourself
doing the macro,
give it a go with will
work just as well.
Then here this, you could
definitely record
yourself doing this.
This is to reset the
value in I3 back to 1996.
I'm going to close
that up, let's go
and hook up our macros.
I'm going to
right-click on Animate,
assign Macro, and we're going to
choose Chart Animate and Okay.
Then the same thing for
the reset right-click,
assign Macro and this
time Chart Reset,
and Okay. Click
away for a moment.
I'm going to click Animate,
and you can actually see
it scrolling through
the years and how the population
is changing over time.
If I click Reset it
sets it back to 1996.
What we've looked at here are
a few really interesting
techniques for creating
your own custom charts to add
that wow factor to
your visualizations.